Welcome back.
Let's talk about higher order functions now.
Higher order functions are simply a function that can take a function as an argument or a function that
returns another function.
That's it.
That's all higher order function is.
But the big problem is that most people know what a higher order functions are but don't really understand
why they're useful.
Why we care.
So my challenge in this video is to make you understand why higher order functions are useful.
Let's get started with the first one.
Let's start off with function and see what sort of problems we have with just a simple function.
Let's say we're creating a system for our company where we have to let users log in.
So I'm going to just naively create a function called let Adam log in in this simple function is going
to do some sort of work to authenticate the user.
In my case just to keep things simple I'm just going to create and write an empty array and we're going
to simulate the type of work that the system I need to do.
So let's do a for loop that says let I equal to zero.
That's not zero.
That's 0.
And let's say i is less than a big number.
And then finally we increment i one by one and then here we'll just do a red dot.
Push the index.
So we're doing something completely useless.
But just to slow down our system so that at the end of it hopefully everything works out and we can
just return ACCESS GRANTED TO ADAM Good job Adam.
So that if I run let Adam log in I get access granted to Adam.
But you saw that there was a bit of a pause there.
If I add an extra zero here and I run you see that there's a bit of time that takes to grant access
to Adam.
So for now just think of this as a some sort of an authentication log in service that the company has
all right.
So that's great.
We just created a function that lets Adam log in but our company has more employees right.
What if we also have Eva.
Well Eva needs to log in as well so let's create another function for Avon.
Now this function favor instead of let Adam log in we'll be let a log in and we'll change access granted
to Eva and then we can call that function that Eva log in.
Now I'm going to change the zeros here just so it's a little bit faster and I'll cook.
Right.
There you go.
Access granted to Eva perfect.
Now what's the problem with this code the principle that we always hear as developers dry do not repeat
yourself.
We've created some code that is not very flexible right for each user that we have we have to copy and
paste code and repeat ourself.
And imagine if we had hundreds and hundreds of employees doing this every time.
Well that's that's not very clean is it.
It's not very efficient.
It's not very easy to read or reasonable.
So how can we fix this.
Well let's move on to our next level.
Let's go from a simple function to a function that accepts parameters to gain some superpowers.
Let's have a look.
Instead of doing this manually let's remove this and let's create a generic let the user log in function
in this user is going to accept a parameter.
User that will give access to some user.
In this case.
Well let's extract this piece of code out first.
So let me copy this out and ideally we want some access to be granted to a user so let's say I do let
user log in and I'll do Adam cyclic run here.
Access granted to Adam and then if I do that user log in to Evan and by Evan I mean Eva I get gave us
an access.
Now let's refactor this code a little bit to make it cleaner.
I'm going to create a another function and this function will just be called give access to that accepts
a user and this user and you know let's use an arrow function here just to change things up and this
error function is going to return access granted to the user or let's just say name so that we're being
descriptive here.
Now due to the nature of aero functions and because I only have one line I can do this and not wrap
it in a curly bracket and this automatically gets returned.
So that now I can just say give access to
so what superpower do we just gain here.
Well we leveled up over here because in here we've done something amazing.
We now tell the function what data to use when we call it so remember before we had a function and that
function when we actually called it decided what to do with that data instead.
We now have a more generic function that says hey I'm going to give you later on some generic piece
of data.
I don't know what yet but when I pass you the user do some sort of functionality to it so that instead
of defining Eva or Adam inside of the function we can just define that later on when we actually invoke
the function so we have the ability when we call the function to define the data so we essentially have
a bit more flexibility instead of when we define the function telling it what exactly one needs to be
done.
We can delay that until execution time and this gives us as you can see more flexibility.
We kept our code dry.
Awesome.
That's great.
But I thought we're going to talk about higher order functions.
Well let's see how we might have another problem here.
What if we have instead of just a user we also have admin somebody with a lot higher privilege.
Well we'd have to copy this code.
And this time around say let admin log in let me remove the comment from here.
And this time around instead of just a simple user it's an admin and this admin we have to give it access
but because their admin they have to go through a bit more security procedures and let's say it takes
a little bit more time for them to get authenticate so the function has changed a little bit.
We have a different loop here a different permission process.
So what do we do here.
Well we just copied more code.
We're not being very dry are we.
And imagine if we had many more roles in the company instead of just users and admins maybe we have
managers maybe we have secretaries maybe we have guest access.
So what can we do here.
And this is where higher order functions are gonna come into play.
You remember this we ran from functions with functions with parameters that way instead of just saying
when we defined the function exactly what to do and what data to use.
We're able to now say hey we defined the function what it does.
But later on we'll tell you what data we need with a higher order function we get to do both of those
things when we actually call the function that is we can give it the data and also tell the function
what to do or some extra abilities when we actually invoke.
So let's see this in code this time around.
Let's create an authenticate function and this authenticate function will take a parameter which is
the verification process in our case we'll just give it a number which is the time of authentication.
So let's just do verify and inside of this function we can just remove this authentication process that
we keep writing everywhere and the number will just be the parameter verify so that it's more dynamic
and we can change it.
According to the user or the admin so we have the authenticate.
And just for from largest return true saying that yep we've verified everything.
You can have access.
Like I said a little bit of a useless code right now but I hope you get the idea.
Now we have the authenticate function we have they give access to function.
How can we make these functions better.
Well instead of let admin log in let user log in let's remove these and instead let's just create a
general function let person function that accepts a person as the first parameter and then a function
as the second parameter.
And remember our definition of high order functions it's either a function that returns another function
or a function that accepts a function as a parameter so that if inside of here I say let's do a simple
check saying person DOT level is admin.
In that case we'll call a function with the five or five hundred thousand loop.
Remember this is gonna be verify later on and then we'll say else if person DOT level
is user their level of authentication won't be as intense so we'll just say function 5 or 100000 and
then afterwards we can just return give access to and then this person will also have a name.
So how did this make things easier.
Well let's have a look.
I can now say something like let person and this person will be an object that has level user error
remember this level is going to be used to decide if they're in men or user and the name will be decided
for giving access to that person will say this is Tim.
And now the first parameter is the person.
And the second parameter is the function.
What should we let the person do.
Well we want to authenticate the person so that let's make this a little bit smaller or actually doesn't
really help.
All right.
So now we let person authenticate.
Let's see if that works.
I run all right access granted to time because I can't spell Tim all right.
And if I change this to men and let's say this is Sally I run this access granted to Sally what power
do we just gain here.
Well We've now gained the power to not only tell it what data to use but we also got the power to tell
it what to do.
So the function as well.
So we created a generic function let person remember how we had just let Adam log in how very specific
that was.
Instead we have a more generic let person that accepts a person as a first parameter and then a function.
In this case authenticate as the second parameter.
Now this over here wasn't very descriptive.
We could have just said authenticate here as a parameter and have it a little bit more descriptive.
But by making things General we can now do something like this.
We can add a function let's say function sync and this sing We'll take a person and this person well
we'll be able to sync.
So houses do return.
La la la.
My name is and then add person dot name
because our let person function is more general now is a higher order function because it accepts a
function as a parameter yes that person is a higher order function I can now say instead of let person
authenticate I can say it let the person sink and if I run this well I'm still going to get access granted
to Sally because we have this return give access to function here but maybe again to make it more general
we can remove this and maybe added to the authenticate function right here at the very end
and in here all we really do is just return some generic functions remember a high order function return
other functions so that here instead of just giving a solid number for admin and user we can just give
it the person parameter fact like run that la la la.
My name is Sally we're able to make.
Let person be a lot more generic and do many more things to it.
Now we did break a bit of functionality here and that's the verify now needs something a little bit
more perhaps we can do some sort of a conditional saying that if person we pass and the person rate
if person dot is an admin then we'll do this sort of authentication but I hope you get that what we've
been able to achieve with higher order functions is this ability to tell the function what to do during
invocation we're able to have a little bit more flexibility than we had before we're able to keep our
code dry and a lot more flexible let me show you one more example just to make sure that we got this
if I had a function cost multiply by and I want this function to be a generic function that I can just
create multiple functions from it calling then multiply by 2 multiply by let's say 10.
So on and so forth how would I go about doing that you know what.
Instead of me just showing you how about you try this yourself and in the next video I'll show you how
we can do this.